ALMA Digs Deeper into the Mystery of Planet Formation
28 June, 2023 / Read time: 7 minutes

Scientific Paper


An international research team used the Atacama Large 
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) to observe disks around 19 
protostars with a very high resolution to search for the earliest signs of 
planet formation. This survey, called "Early Planet Formation in Embedded 
Disks (eDisk)" and led by Nagayoshi Ohashi at Academia Sinica Institute of 
Astronomy and Astrophysics (ASIAA, Taiwan), was motivated by the recent 
findings that planet formation may be well-underway in the more-evolved 
protoplanetary disks that have been studied in detail with ALMA, but until 
now there had been no systematic study to search for signs of planet 
formation in younger protostellar systems.

The origins of our Solar System and extrasolar planetary systems is one of 
the most important themes in modern astronomy. Our Sun formed about 4.6 
billion years ago and all Sun-like stars form through a similar process. 
As part of this process, a disk forms around the newborn star and within 
these disks planets will form.[1] These protoplanetary disks are expected 
to only last a few million years, meaning that a forming planetary system 
only has this amount of time to finish its formation. However, it is still 
not clear just how rapidly planet formation begins within their disks. 
Recent ALMA observations have revealed that many protoplanetary disks have 
substructures such as gaps and rings. This is strong evidence that planets 
are forming and sweeping up material from the disk. On the other hand, 
many proto-planetary disks show such signs, suggesting that planet 
formation is already in progress or has almost completed in the systems we 
typically refer to as 'protoplanetary disks'. “These previous results 
motivated us to examine even younger disks around protostars to answer the 
question, at what stage of star formation do planet forms,” says Ohashi.

With this motivation, the team focused on disks around protostars, systems 
that are only 10,000 to 100,000 years old, and observed the radio emission 
emitted from dust grains, i.e., the building blocks of planets, in disks 
with ALMA. Previous studies have only observed a small handful of 
protostars with the resolution necessary to detect signs of planet 
formation. The international team observed disks around 19 protostars 
located within about 650 light-years from the Earth utilizing the very 
high angular resolution of ALMA[2] to examine the structure of the 
protostellar disks in detail. This is the first systematic study to 
investigate the detailed structure of disks around a large sample of 
protostars with such a high angular resolution.

The observations confirmed that there are disks around all the protostars, 
meaning that the minimum conditions for planet formation are already 
present in these young protostar systems. However, the observations 
clearly show that the disks around protostars are different from 
more-evolved protoplanetary disks. Among the 19 protostars, rings, and 
gaps, which are signs of planet formation, were observed only in a few 
disks toward the most evolved protostars. Moreover, the ring structures 
are less distinct than those seen in the protoplanetary disks. It was also 
found that the dust (building blocks of planets) in many disks, is not 
settled in the disk midplane. Rather the dust is aloft, above the disk 
midplane, making the disks appear thick in the vertical direction. In 
more-evolved disks, in contrast, the dust settles down in the midplane 
thereby making them appear much thinner. “We did not expect to see such 
clear differences between disks around protostars and more-evolved disks,” 
says Ohashi. John Tobin, a Co-PI of the program at the National Radio 
Astronomical Observatory (USA) adds “Our results suggest that disks around 
protostars are not fully ready for planet formation. We believe that the 
actual formation of the planetary system progresses rapidly in the 100,000 
years to 1,000,000 years after star formation begins”.

Jes Jørgensen, the other Co-PI of the program at the Niels Bohr Institute 
of University of Copenhagen (Denmark) also mentions the importance of 
international cooperation in planning and implementing such a large-scale 
program. “There are 37 researchers from 15 research institutes 
participating in the international research group that promoted this 
research. In addition, about half of them are graduate students or young 
researchers who have recently obtained their Ph.D. This research gives 
many young researchers the opportunity to participate in large-scale 
international programs, and it can be said that this program plays a major 
role in nurturing future research and collaboration.”
